.Dd June 07, 2023
.Dt RAGNAROK-LIVE 8
.Os Ragnarok
.Sh NAME
.Nm ragnarok-live
.Nd information related to the Ragnarok live system
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This document attempts to give as much information as possible about Ragnarok's
live environment. The idea is to give a quick rundown of the tools available by
default so that users can get familiar with the system in the most straightforward
fashion.
.Sh X SESSION
.Ss Starting an Xsession
If not done already, you can start X11 by issuing the
.Xr startx 1
command.
.Ss Window Manager
Ragnarok includes two window managers: a fork of Suckless'
.Xr dwm 1 ,
which is the default when logging into X, and
.Xr cwm 1 ,
from the OpenBSD project. Using cwm is as simple as changing the WM variable in
.Pa ~/.xinitrc
from "dwm" to "cwm" and (re)starting X.
.Ss dwm
The version of
.Xr dwm 1
included has been patched to add the bottomstack, leftstack and deck layouts. It
also includes gaps in all layouts (including monocle). Layouts can be set per tag
and an option to increase/decrease the height of the bar is also available.
.Pp
This version of dwm does not support launching applications via keybindings set in
its config file (see the
.Sx Keyboard Shortcuts
section for more details), only window and tag manipulations get handled by the window
manager's internal keyboard shortcuts. For a list of keybindings supported by the window
manager, see either the
.Pa /usr/src/dwm/config.h
file, or hit the alt+shift+? keyboard shortcut to display the list in vim.
.Pp
Basic system information (memory usage, cpu load, network connection status, volume level
and date/time) is displayed to the right inside the status bar. This information is set by
the
.Pa /usr/local/bin/statusbar.sh
script.
.Ss cwm
Calm Window Manager, from the OpenBSD project, is also available in the base system. The
live environment includes a custom
.Pa ~/.cwmrc
config file, and a status bar is drawn at the top of the screen, using a custom script (
.Pa /usr/local/bin/cwmbar
) piped to
.Xr lemonbar 1 .
.Pp
Much like dwm, cwm's config file does not set keyboard shortcuts to open applications, only
for window and group manipulation. Available keybindings for cwm can be viewed in .cwmrc 
or by hitting the alt+shift+? keyboard shortcut.
.Ss Terminal Emulator
The default terminal in Ragnarok is
.Xr rt 1 ,
a lightly patched fork of Suckless' st. Since it is meant to provide a minimal terminal for
.Xr tmux 1 ,
rt does not come with much features, since tmux already provides them. The two patches applied
are for cosmetic purposes, allowing a transparent background and configuration through the
.Pa ~/.Xresources
file.
.Pp
.Xr xterm 1
is also provided, with it's own theming in Xresources.
.Ss Keyboard Shortcuts
The
.Xr sxhkd 1
program is provided with a set of default keybindings to open programs in
.Pa ~/.config/sxhkd/sxhkdrc .
This means that all program-related shortcuts will work regardless of the window manager
being used.
.Ss Extra Software
The live iso also provides all other programs included in Ragnarok's X11 package set:
.Xr xcompmgr 1 ,
.Xr xclip 1 ,
.Xr xwallpaper 1 ,
.Xr dunst 1 ,
.Pp
Many programs not available in a standard Ragnarok base system are also added for a more
complete experience, among them:
.Xr firefox-esr 1 ,
.Xr vifm 1 ,
.Xr mpv 1 ,
.Xr nsxiv 1 ,
.Xr scrot 1 .
.Sh SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION
Since this is a live system, there isn't much in the way of system administration. However,
a few things may be of interest.
.Ss Networking
Wired network connections should be properly set at boot time, but wireless networks will
have to be configured manually. The Ragnarok live iso includes a small script to quickly
setup an interface file to use with
.Xr wpasupplicant 1 ,
called
.Pa addwifi .
With root privileges, simply run the command:
.Pp
.Dl doas addwifi.sh
.Pp
and answer the questions. After completion, the interface file will be located in
.Pa /etc/network/interfaces.d/<interface-name> .
For security reasons, the file can only be read with root privileges. Afterwards,
you can connect to the network using the ifup command:
.Pp
.Dl doas ifup <interface-name> 
.Ss security updates
The live iso is rebuilt whenever the kernel receives a security update. However, other
programs may have been updated since the iso's release and should still be updated even
if running a live system (particularly web browsers). It is important to run apt update
and apt upgrade as soon as an internet connection is established.
.Ss hardened malloc
Ragnarok uses GrapheneOS' hardened memory allocator for extra security and provides
three different variants: strong, medium (Ragnarok's default) and light, each providing
different levels of protection. By its nature, hardened-malloc may cause performance
loss under certain conditions. The medium variant was specifically designed by the
Ragnarok project to offer a midle-ground between the strong and light variants provided
by upstream, to offer slightly more protection than the light variant, with less cpu
usage than the strong variant on older (pre-2010) hardware. On newer hardware, you
may wish to enable the strong variant, while on older hardware, you might need to enable
the light variant if the performance drop is too significant.
.Pp
Switching variant is as simple as changing its symlink:
.Pp
.Dl # ln -sf /usr/lib/hardened_malloc/libhardened_malloc-<variant>.so /usr/lib/libhardened_malloc.so
.Ss Firewall
The base system comes with nftables installed and enabled by default, using a sane configuration
file which blocks all incoming and forwarded connections by default. If one wishes to modify
the default configuration, then simply edit the
.Pa /etc/nftables.conf
file and restart the service with the following command
.Pp
.Dl # service nftables restart
